Venkateshwaran Shanmugham
Staff Software Engineer - Cloudera
Software developer with 10+ years of experience in developing highly distributed systems, API design & development, microservice architecture, and a technology enthusiast. Proficient in algorithms, data structures, system design, distributed architecture, API design, design patterns and problem-solving.


venkateshwaracholan@gmail.com

+91 9940522211

Bangalore, India

linkedin.com/in/venkateshwaracholan
Work Experience (10+ Years)
Staff Software Engineer
Remote | Bangalore
Cloudera
Apr 2024 – Present
Designed a generative RAG pipeline with OpenSearch and Azure OpenAI to improve Cloudera data search accuracy and speed.
Built & productionized AI applications for Cloudera AI Hackathon APAC 2025, integrating them into a unified agent — boosting support engineer productivity by 30%.
Led architecture and technical vision with mentorship of team members for efficiency and scalability.
Senior Technical Lead
Remote | Chennai
Paytm Payments Bank
Apr 2023 – Apr 2024
Led backend development and owned the UPI Reconciliation Engine processing 50–100M transactions/day.
Drove architecture, grooming, and sprint ownership with measurable deliverables; owned deployments, metrics, and alerts to ensure reliability.
Staff Software Engineer
Remote | Chennai
Cloudera
Oct 2020 – Dec 2022
Owned Clues, an internal search service built with Solr, NiFi, Kafka, Spark, HBase, Impala, HDFS.
Designed integrations, feature development, and architectural revamps for scalability and extensibility.
Managed, mentored, and ensured technical grooming, ownership, and measurable delivery for the team.
Senior Software Engineer
Chennai
Freshworks
Mar 2018 – Oct 2020
Developed backend features for Freshcaller, cloud telephony product with real-time processing.
Parallelized unit tests on CD/CI pipelines, reducing execution time proportionally to CPU cores speeding it up by 16 times faster
Member Technical Staff
Chennai
Zoho
Aug 2015 – Dec 2017
Developed backend features for Zoho Reports, cloud analytics and visualization product.
Implemented Trash Model for entity management.
Skills & Proficiencies
Java
Kafka
Spark
OpenSearch
MySQL
Algorithms
Data Structures
System Design
API Design
Design Patterns
Architecture
Honors & Awards
Winner — Cloudera AI Hackathon 2025 APAC Region for building multiple AI applications to enhance the quality of life for support engineers and integrating them into an AI agent for a unified interface.
Promoted to Staff Software Engineer at Cloudera (2022) for driving high-impact technical initiatives, leading architectural revamps, and delivering scalable solutions that enhanced system performance and team productivity.
Special Jury Award — Freshworks Appathon 2019 for designing "FreshGlow", an IoT-integrated solution triggering visual cues for metrics exceeding thresholds, enhancing real-time decision-making.
Education
Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application

Alagappa University, Karaikudi

Jan 2018 – Jan 2019

Bachelor of Engineering - ECE

Anna University, Chennai

Jul 2011 – Apr 2015

Languages
English — Native or Bilingual Proficiency

Interests
Gaming
Exploring Diversity
Learning
Imagination
Social Inventing
Problem Solving
Extrovertism
Crafting